blog: add Postgres capability blog (#598)
wasmCloud/wasmCloud.com: blog/2024-09-17-wasmcloud-postgres-capability-brings-pluggable-databases/index.mdx

---
title: "The wasmCloud Postgres capability brings pluggable databases for your apps"
authors: [ericgregory]
image: './images/wasmcloud-postgres-capability.webp'
slug: 2024-09-17-wasmcloud-postgres-capability-brings-pluggable-databases
date: "2024-09-17"
description: "Learn how to get started with the Postgres capability in wasmCloud."
---

> ![The wasmCloud Postgres capability brings pluggable databases for your apps](./images/wasmcloud-postgres-capability.webp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![The wasmCloud Postgres capability brings pluggable PostgreSQL access for your apps](./images/wasmcloud-postgres-capability.webp)
```

> With wasmCloud, you can build applications out of WebAssembly components and pluggable, reusable [**capabilities**](/docs/concepts/capabilities), so you can focus on the core logic of your application and abstract away the rest, all using open source standards.

Reviewer: Might be nice to make `wasmCloud` a link here to the docs/intro -- people *could* land here without knowing what wasmCloud is

> If you want to use a database system like **Postgres**, wasmCloud makes it easy to simply plug in the functionality in a reusable, language-agnostic way, without wasting time writing boilerplate code. In this post, we'll show you how to get started with the Postgres capability in wasmCloud.

Reviewer: A sentence like "Postgres is one of the most used relational database systems", and Postgres should probably be a link to https://postgresql.org, as this mention is earlier

> If you want to use a database system like **Postgres**, wasmCloud makes it easy to simply plug in the functionality in a reusable, language-agnostic way, without wasting time writing boilerplate code. In this post, we'll show you how to get started with the Postgres capability in wasmCloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to use a database system like **Postgres**, wasmCloud makes it easy to simply plug in the functionality in a reusable, language-agnostic way, without wasting time writing boilerplate code. 

In this post, we'll show you how to get started with the Postgres capability in wasmCloud.
```

> ## Database capabilities speed up development

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Speed up development: Write queries without managing connection pools
```

> Enterprise application teams need flexible database options, and for many, [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) is the tool of choice. But like many basic, non-functional requirements, teams can waste a lot of time getting to grips with libraries in this or that language and worrying about how to implement their database for a given project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enterprise application teams need flexible database options, and for many, [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) is the tool of choice. But like many basic, non-functional requirements, teams waste time configuring client libraries in `$LANGUAGE` and managing connection pools and implementation.
```

I personally like `$LANGUAGE` and the like as placeholders in personal posts - -what do you think? I don't know what our stance on this is

> Capabilities abstract these worries away. In practice, every wasmCloud capability consists of two parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Capabilities abstract away database configuration and remove this toil.**

In practice, every wasmCloud capability consists of two parts:
```

wasmCloud capability could maybe be a link to the docs

* An **interface**: The standard contract for a piece of functionality, defined in [WebAssembly Interface Type (WIT)](/docs/concepts/interfaces#webassembly-interface-type-wit), defining an API for any language that uses the interface.
* A **capability provider**:  The executable that plugs in to wasmCloud and delivers the functionality in question.

> In this case, you can use a [single API](https://github.com/wasmCloud/wasmCloud/tree/main/wit/postgres) for Postgres operations, regardless of your development language, and simply plug the [Postgres capability provider](https://github.com/wasmCloud/wasmCloud/tree/main/crates/provider-sqldb-postgres) into your application manifest when you deploy to wasmCloud. (Later on, if you need to migrate to another system, that's no problem&mdash;the `wasmcloud-postgres` interface can be used by any system that supports the WIT standard.)

Reviewer: I think the "later on" bit could be moved out into an info box!

> 

Reviewer: A nice addition might be to note that this *isn't* a one-size-fits-all SQL interface, it can take advantage of Postgres-specific features, like `RETURNING *` and DDL in queries with explicit `BEGIN`/`COMMIT` transactions ([`query-batch` interface](https://github.com/wasmCloud/wasmCloud/blob/main/wit/postgres/wit/query.wit#L26), if you want to link to something)

## Get started with Postgres on wasmCloud

Let's try it out. We'll use a Rust-based component, but you don't really have to be familiar with the language. For this example, you'll just need:

- The [wasmcloud Shell (`wash`)](https://wasmcloud.com/docs/installation) CLI to build WebAssembly components and deploy to local wasmCloud.
- [`cargo`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/getting-started/installation.html) (part of the Rust toolchain) to help build from Rust
- [`docker`](https://docs.docker.com) to easily run an instance of Postgres.

### Start Postgres and wasmCloud locally

First we need to get a Postgres cluster running. We can do this quickly and easily with Docker:

```console
docker run \
    --rm \
    -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=postgres \

>     --name pg -p 5432:5432\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -p 5432:5432 \
    --name pg \
```

    postgres:16.2-alpine
```

> Next we'll start our local wasmCloud, using the `-d` flag to run in the background:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next we'll start our local wasmCloud, using the `-d`/`--detached` flag to run in the background:
```

```shell
wash up -d
```

> 

Reviewer: We might want to put an info block here on how to read the logs

### Generate a new project

> Now we'll generate a new project using the Rust-based `sqldb-postgres-query` example from the wasmCloud monorepo as a template.

Reviewer: It might be nice if the example was a link to the Github code

> ```shell
> wash new component postgres-demo --git wasmcloud/wasmcloud --subfolder examples/rust/components/sqldb-postgres-query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
wash new component postgres-demo \
    --git wasmcloud/wasmcloud \
    --subfolder examples/rust/components/sqldb-postgres-query
```

```
```shell
cd postgres-demo
```

If you're familiar with Rust, in `src/lib.rs` you'll see that the [code](https://github.com/wasmCloud/wasmCloud/blob/main/examples/rust/components/sqldb-postgres-query/src/lib.rs) for  querying Postgres is very simple:

```rs
impl Guest for QueryRunner {
    fn call() -> String {
        if let Err(e) = query(CREATE_TABLE_QUERY, &[]) {
            return format!("ERROR - failed to create table: {e}");
        };

        match query(
            INSERT_QUERY,
            &[PgValue::Text(format!("inserted example row!"))],
        ) {
            Ok(rows) => format!("SUCCESS: inserted new row:\n{rows:#?}"),
            Err(e) => format!("ERROR: failed to insert row: {e}"),
        }
    }
}
```

Next build your WebAssembly component from the Rust code.

```console
wash build
```

The build process generates a folder called `build` containing `sqldb-postgres-query_s.wasm`.

### Deploy the demo

> The next step for a wasmCloud application deployment is usually to define the components and providers you'll be using in a deployment manifest. We have a pre-populated manifest (`wadm.yaml`) in our project directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step for a wasmCloud application deployment is usually to define the components and providers you'll be using in a deployment manifest. 

For building locally, there is a prebuilt  manifest (`local.wadm.yaml`) in the project directory.
```

IIRC We have `local.wadm.yaml` for the example right?

In the interest of security, we'll use the `wash config` subcommand to define a "named configuration" called `default-postgres`: 

```console
wash config put default-postgres \
    POSTGRES_HOST=localhost \
    POSTGRES_PORT=5432 \
    POSTGRES_USERNAME=postgres \
    POSTGRES_PASSWORD=postgres \
    POSTGRES_DATABASE=postgres \
    POSTGRES_TLS_REQUIRED=false
```

> In our application manifest (`wadm.yaml`), we tell our provider to simply use the named configuration that we provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Postgres provider knows to use this configuration because of our application maifest (`local.wadm.yaml`), where we've referred to `default-postgres` for named configuration.
```

Now it's time to deploy: 

```console
wash app deploy wadm.yaml
```

Confirm the application is deployed:

```console
wash app list

> ```
> ```text                 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You should see output like the following:

```
```

  Name                          Deployed Version              Status                       
  rust-sqldb-postgres-query     v0.1.0                        Deployed                     
    └ Demo WebAssembly component using the wasmCloud SQLDB Postgres provider via the wasmcloud:postgres WIT interface                
```

### Invoke the demo component

> Now that the application is deployed, we can use the `wash call` subcommand to invoke the component. This means we're going to use the CLI to call the `call` function of the `invoke` interface directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the `sqldb-postgres-query` component includes [a simple `invoke` interface](https://github.com/wasmCloud/wasmCloud/blob/main/examples/rust/components/sqldb-postgres-query/wit/component.wit#L6), which enables using `wash call` to trigger the component directly via the CLI:
```

```shell
wash call rust_sqldb_postgres_query-querier wasmcloud:examples/invoke.call
```
```text
SUCCESS: inserted and manually retrieved new row:
[
    [
        ResultRowEntry {
            column-name: "description",
            value: PgValue::Text(
                "inserted example row!",
            ),
        },
    ],
]
```

### Clean up

When you're finished, you can undeploy and delete the application:

```shell

> wash app undeploy rust-sqldb-postgres-query && wash app delete rust-sqldb-postgres-query

Reviewer: IMO this can be shortened to just `wash app delete`

```
To stop your local wasmCloud:

> ```shell

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

wash down
```

## Learn more and get involved

> Explore the [Capability Catalog](/docs/capabilities/) to learn more about the first and third-party capabilities already available on wasmCloud. If you'd like to get involved with the community or learn more about building your own components and capabilities, [join us on the wasmCloud Slack](https://slack.wasmcloud.com/)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Explore the [Capability Catalog](/docs/capabilities/) to learn more about the first and third-party capabilities already available on wasmCloud. 

Want to get involved with the community or learn more about building your own components and capabilities? [Join us on the wasmCloud Slack](https://slack.wasmcloud.com/)!
```
